JUDY WOODRUFF: This week
marks the 50th anniversary
of the landmark Supreme
Court decision Loving
vs. Virginia.
In 1967, the justices struck
down Virginia's laws prohibiting
interracial marriage.
In her latest book, "Loving:
Interracial Intimacy in
America and the Threat
to White Supremacy,"
Georgetown University
law Professor Sheryll
Cashin explores the
history of white supremacy
in this country and how
relationships between different
races challenge that ideology.
As part of our Race
Matters series, I sat down
with Cashin yesterday.
Sheryll Cashin, thank you
very much for joining us.
So, the title of the book refers
to the Virginia couple, Richard
Loving, his wife, Mildred,
who were arrested, thrown in
jail for the crime of marrying
each other in the state
of Virginia in the 1950s,
and then, in 1967, the
Supreme Court decision.
But your story, your telling
of this story, the book, goes
much earlier than that, to
the -- before the
beginning of this country.
ÑMDNMÑSHERYLL CASHIN, Author,
"Loving: Interracial Intimacy
in America and the Threat
to White Supremacy":
The anti-miscegenation
law was created as part
of the law of slavery.
In the 1600s, you had
white indentured servants
and black indentured
servants and slaves working
together, fraternizing together.
And when slave owners wanted
to transition to black chattel
slavery, they had this problem.
And so they put in slave
codes laws that penalized
interracial sex and marriage.
And that was --
began in the 1660s.
And so, for the next 300
years, you had the state of
Virginia and other states trying
to separate people like
Mildred and Richard Loving.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Going back to the
beginning, was this something
that was just bred in the
psyche of the people who
lived in this country?
Where did it come from?
SHERYLL CASHIN: Well, in the
elite capitalist class, the
landed gentry that could afford
to buy big estates and
own people, this idea
of the supremacy of the
white Christian goes
back to the Crusades.
But there is much evidence that,
in colonial Virginia, in the
colonies, the working bonded
people didn't have a
concept of whiteness or
supremacy or race at all.
They related to each other
as struggling people.
It's only when the slave owning
class needs to teach people to
treat each other differently
based on race for utilitarian
reasons that that begins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What were the
forces along the way in the
history of this country that
were pushing against
people coming together,
that were working against,
not just intermarriage,
but friendships, any kind of
connections between the races?
SHERYLL CASHIN: Right.
Wherever you have a regime
of the color line, whether
it's slavery or Jim Crow
or a divide-and-conquer
kind of politics, there's
an economic story there.
What the elites most
feared was that struggling
whites and people of
color would come together
in politics to demand
more of economic elites.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, along
the way, as you point out
throughout the book, there were
also forces at work to bring
the two -- not just the two,
but to bring all races together.
SHERYLL CASHIN: America
has been in this dance
from the beginning.
There have been two ideas,
the beautiful, egalitarian,
fundamental idea of universal
human dignity in Thomas
Jefferson's words in
the Declaration of
Independence, but also
this regime of white supremacy
that is really designed
to help with capitalism.
And throughout this period,
there have always been a small
cadre of people that crossed
lines for alliance or for love.
And I feature some
of those people.
Some of my favorites are
Frederick Douglass and
Thaddeus Stevens, who
not only were radical
in their politics, but were
radical enough to have women
of a different race as their
lovers or common law
wives or -- or wives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why were
they able to prevail
in some instances?
SHERYLL CASHIN: The
radical Republicans behind
Reconstruction prevailed
with the idea that
people of color and progressive
open-minded whites would
come together in politics for
the common good and create
things like public education.
My bottom line point is that the
class of what I call culturally
dexterous person that's
open to difference in
this country and wants to
make it work is growing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's what
I wanted to ask you, because
you do use the term cultural
dexterity throughout.
SHERYLL CASHIN: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What
do you mean by that?
SHERYLL CASHIN: So, cultural
dexterity is the ability to
enter a situation where you
are outnumbered by a
different group and
experience that with comfort,
even wonder, an enhanced
capacity for dealing with
people of a different group.
It's the opposite
of colorblindness.
It's the ability to see
and understand difference
and accept it, rather
than sort of demanding
that someone else assimilate
to your cultural norms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why do
you think it's spreading?
I know there are people who
look at the racial divide in
this country today and say, yes,
we have made progress, but we
have such a long way to go.
SHERYLL CASHIN:
Yes, I will agree.
I acknowledge that we're in
a state of toxic polarity.
But all I'm saying is that I
believe we're going to get to
a point where a critical mass
of folks, particularly white
people in this country, have
accepted the loss of centrality
of whiteness.
And when you combine those folks
with growing populations of
people of color, you're going
to get a majority coalition
that will fight together
for the common good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even if, along
the way, you may always have
a group of people who fiercely
believe something different.
SHERYLL CASHIN: Yes.
I'm not saying that interracial
relationships are going to make
racism go away, or -- nothing
like that.
There will always
probably be some people,
unfortunately, that are racist.
But I think they're
a minority now.
And I think they
will continue to be a
minority in this country.
And what gives me hope is that
there is a growing population
of folks who like diversity
and want to make it work and
want to be part of the coalition
for bringing everybody along.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sheryll Cashin,
the book is "Loving: Interracial
Intimacy in America and
the Threat to White Supremacy,"
Thank you very much.
SHERYLL CASHIN:
Thank you so much.